---
title: "Module 3: Planning Process"
description: "Description of the most important methodological steps for defining the bio-corridors"
tags: modules
date: 2021-12-12
order: 3
eleventyNavigation:
    key: Module_0
    parent: Decision_makers
layout: layouts/post.njk
---

**Description of the most important methodological steps for defining the bio-corridors**

Due to extensiveness of research of the relevant territory a frequent
problem of heterogenous databases of the concerned countries and
therefore for supra-regional bio-corridors there is a need to find a
method of harmonizing the sequence of individual steps during its
defining. For example, during the project of Alps-Carpathian
bio-corridors, a scientifically sound approach of using satellite
pictures and on this base in large scales to define the potential
tracings of bio-corridors had been utilized. Based on the use of
detailed data further on the selected area for bio-corridor tracing was
researched focusing on specific preconditions and requirements or
potentials and limitations stemming from the frameworks defined by
relevant spatial/urban planning system.

![bears and houses](/images/modules/decision-making/3_image1.png)

Source: Photo © Interreg Danube Transnational Programme

**Step 1 -- Analysis of the natural conditions and analysis of the natural migration tendencies in the wider territory of the proposed bio-corridor**

This step represents professional analytical activity leading to
defining the natural preconditions of the territory for bio-corridor
functioning and identification of the existing natural migration paths
of wildlife species or the trends of their migration. In spite of the
fact that this is professional activity, wider cooperation of experts is
assumed, representatives of nature protection, hunters and other
subjects disposing of relevant knowledge about the territory. Its result
is a map of permeability of the territory the existing migration paths
and tendencies of wildlife species. Different approaches and methods can
be used starting with the evaluation of satellite pictures and ending
with the identification of the paths based on wild animal footprints.

**Step 2 -- Partial analyses of the referential territory from the point
of view of the bio-corridor functioning -- complex territorial
analysis**

The key factor for determining the existing and potential bio-corridors
(required to be restored or newly established as measures for
improvement of the eco-connectivity in the landscape) is complex
territorial analysis. Within this step, analyses of the referential
territory from the point of view of the existing transport and
infrastructure objects and tracings, functional land use, settlement
structure (built up areas in particular), elements of land cover and
other factors relevant for functioning of migration processes of
wildlife species in the referential area and consequently the
functioning of the existing and potential bio-corridors, are
implemented. During this step, too, it is important to cooperate with
various subjects disposing of knowledge about the area.

**Step 3 -- Analyses of sectoral and comprehensive planning
documents**

Other information and data documenting the existing status and
perspectives of development in the territory such as road network or
functional land use can be obtained from analysis of the sectoral
documents, cadastre maps etc. This step is therefore in Slovakia focused
on analysis of sectoral and synthetizing planning documents with
emphasis on urban planning documents, documents on nature and landscape
protection, landscape plans, terrestrial system of ecological stability
documents, transport development plans, greenery development plans and
other planning documents elaborated for the referential territory and
superior planning documents. The objective is to identify the
development intentions relevant for tracing and functionality of the
bio-corridor. Within this step it is crucial to communicate with
respective municipalities, bodies of regional self-government, public
administration, providers of technical and transport infrastructure and
other subjects relevant in the territory.

**Step 4 -- Identification of ecological capacity of the landscape and
suitability of the land use for species migration -- model of resistance
against/permeability for the migration**

Based on the rules and knowledge of the ecology the landscape is
evaluated from the point of view of its permeability or resistance for
wildlife species. Resistance is understood as the level of stress to
which species are exposed while migrating throw the landscape. In
Slovakia, this is linked to the identification of ecological capacity
and its suitability for individual types and intensity of functional
land use. This task is highly expert and assumed wide interdisciplinary
cooperation. Its results are significant input to the discussion with
the public.

**Step 5 -- Defining the alternatives of bio-corridor
tracing**

In relation to the results of the analytical works in the previous
steps, within this step the alternatives or variants of bio-corridor
tracing, the needs for specific measures, length of bio-bridges or
functional land use changes or limits for the development of built up
areas are defined. Various scenarios for the tracing and area of
bio-corridor can be defined, too.

**Step 6 -- Evaluation of the alternative tracings of the
bio-corridor**

In this step, the alternatives or variants of tracing the bio-corridor
are evaluated, in particular regarding their relation to potentials and
respecting limitations of the territory for wildlife species migration
and other functional land uses and in relation to potential conflicts in
the territory. Especially important is transparency and clarity of
criteria and their evaluation as these are an input for wider discussion
with the stakeholders and a precondition of acceptance of the proposal
by the public. In case of Alps-Carpathian bio-corridor a comparison of
scenarios was elaborated not only qualitatively, but also through
quantitative weighted parameters. An example of these parameters can be
landscape resistance which the wildlife species need to overcome during
the migration. In optimal case this must be of lowest possible value.

**Step 7 -- Selection of the most suitable tracing of the bio-corridor
and its incorporation to the terrestrial system of ecological
stability**

On the basis of the evaluation from the previous step, a selection of
the most suitable tracing should take place and this will be implemented
into a proposal of terrestrial system of ecological stability. This
system is representing by the hierarchic structure eco-centers and their
buffer zones interlinked by bio-corridors. The incorporation of
particular migration corridor in this network is crucial for
effectiveness and efficiency of measures implemented in order to support
connectivity in particular migration corridor. In case of 'bottom-up'
approach, the critical points, defined during the process of defining
the tracing, can be elaborated in greater detail and these can be
re-evaluated according to previously enlisted steps on the basis of
detailed data and precising the knowledge. Within this process,
precising or correcting the tracing of bio-corridor can occur or
implementation measures in either core zone or buffer zone of the
bio-corridor can be defined.

**Step 8 -- Incorporation of bio-corridor tracing proposal to the
landscape plan and urban planning documentation**

In Austria, incorporation of supra-regional migration corridors of the
wildlife species should be implemented in accordance with the valid
legislature on regional planning level. For example, for Alps-Carpathian
bio-corridor in Burgenland region legally binding measures should be
defined in regional development plan. In Lower Austria region the
defined relevant changes in laws should be defined in regional and/or
sectoral programs of spatial development. This way, the legal frameworks
would be determined for local spatial planning on municipality level.
Within the planning itself, clearly defined regulations should be
formulated in relevant expert documents.

In Slovakia, incorporation on bio-corridor tracing as a part of
terrestrial system of ecological stability into the landscape plan is a
component of exploratory and analytical part of the master plan
preparation. The following procurement and preparation of a master plan
is linked with wide public participation in accordance with law act no
50/1976 on spatial planning and building code and law act no. 24/2006 on
environmental impact assessment as the land use planning documentation
is assessed as a strategic document.

## Recommended readings:

-   Iuell, B., Bekker, H., et al. 2003. Wildllife and Traffic. A
    European Handbook for Identifying Conflicts and Designing Solutions.

-   Hrnčiarová, T. et al. 2000. Metodický postup ekologicky optimálneho
    využívania územia v rámci prieskumov a rozborov pre územný plán
    obce. MŽP SR, Združenie KRAJINA 21, Bratislava.

-   Hilty, A., Jodi, L. W. 2006. Corridor Ecology: The Science and
    Practice of Linking Landscapes for Biodiversity Conservation.
    Berkeley: Island Press.

-   Jongmann, G. 2001. Ecological Networks and greenways: Concept,
    design, implementation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
    Cambridge.
