---
title: About E-Learning Platform
layout: layouts/page-toc.njk
---

<h2 id="platform-about">The BISON e-learning platform to help stakeholders integrate biodiversity into transport infrastructure</h2>

The BISON website (https://bison-transport.eu) will include the
E-learning Platform by October 2023 which is an open access tool for all
interested parties to access training/capacity building courses led by
[Slovak University of Technology in Bratislava](https://www.stuba.sk/english). It contains
data available at European and national levels including research,
policies, legislation and different kinds of interactive data and
e-learning materials based on deliverables managed by technical work
packages.

The BISON E-learning Platform is an inherent part of the dissemination
and implementation activities of the [BISON project](https://bison-transport.eu) consortium. This
project is focused on biodiversity and infrastructure synergies and
opportunities for European transport networks. BISON addresses the whole
scale of problems and challenges related to safeguarding and enhancing
biodiversity on the European continent and supporting social and
economic development through safe, efficient and sustainable transport
systems that are accessible and affordable to all citizens. In order to
face these ambitious challenges, the awareness and cooperation
capacities of all relevant stakeholders needs to be developed. The BISON
E-learning Platform aims to support this development by addressing key
stakeholders groups identified according to their position in the
process of developing, using, and maintaining biodiversity and transport
or on their interest on specific issues concerning the harmonization of
biodiversity conservation and transport development.

<h2 id="objectives">The BISON e-learning platform offers different channels for delivering information and creating synergies</h2>

Being aware about different capacities of stakeholders to deal with the
complex of relevant information for active participation in these
processes, the BISON E-learning Platform reflects the existence of
different channels for conveying the information and creating proper
environments for their synergy avoiding the overload and disorientation
of the focuses. Complementarity of information provided, and avoidance
of their inefficient overlapping is an essential part of the concept.

There are several objectives of the E-learning platform listed as
follows:

-   To raise awareness of the stakeholders about the need, potentials
    and limits to harmonize the transport infrastructure and
    biodiversity protection.

-   To develop user-friendly access to relevant information (from BISON
    outputs) addressing particular interest groups based on their
    interest in issues and/or on their belonging to stakeholders' group.

-   To provide proper access to selected data for active engagement of
    stakeholder's groups.

-   To guide particular interest groups through the big pool of data and
    knowledge accumulated by BISON consortium.

-   To safeguard sustainable access to the know-how on harmonization of
    the transport infrastructure and biodiversity protection.

-   To interlink the BISON valuable outputs with the outputs from the
    other EU funded projects.

<h2 id="target-groups">The BISON E-learning platform for both biodiversity experts and non-experts.</h2>

As a biodiversity expert, one can access many thematic blocks of
knowledge on the transport infrastructure and biodiversity protection.
The platform is also suitable for non-biodiversity experts for several
reasons. Experts working on issues not related to biodiversity are also
provided with information to increase their awareness about
biodiversity. Via this platform, it is planned to highlight the
importance of biodiversity in developing transportation infrastructure
and bring it more to the agenda, not only being suitable for fields of
expertise, but also benefiting in the context of environmental impact
and assessment.

The E-learning platform offers the possibility to select
cross-fertilization of knowledge between different transport
infrastructures due to the fact that more than 70% of the knowledge from
most popular transport infrastructure offers still valuable input for
less considered infrastructures. The E-learning platform is addressing
different stakeholders/interest groups with clear targeting information
set in two dimensions -- division of stakeholders based on their role in
transport infrastructure development and based on their interest on
specific issues in the transport infrastructure development and
biodiversity protection and enhancement. Based on this, the e-learning
platform provides information in selective way in the blocks addressing
following stakeholders' groups:

Stakeholder blocks are based on role of the stakeholders such as:

-   EU and National level of government

-   Regional and Local Governance bodies

-   Infrastructure management companies and authorities

-   Planners, designers and infrastructure professionals

-   Academia and scientific community

-   NGOs and civil society

Thematic blocks are based on the interest of the stakeholders such as:

-   Technological Innovations in transport and biodiversity

-   Climate change, biodiversity and eco-connectivity

-   Transport development challenges for biodiversity

-   Planning for technical, social and nature-based responses /
    solutions

-   Designing for technical, social and nature-based responses /
    solutions

-   Strategic environmental assessment, environmental impact assessment
    (SEA/EIA)

The content of the E-learning and proper methods to mediate selected
information to specific stakeholders\' groups follows the logic of the
matrix as shown below:

<figure>
    <img src="/images/about-e-learning/matrix.png" alt="Philosophy of e-learning platform">
    <figcaption>Figure 1. Matrix</figcaption>
</figure>

<h2 id="stakeholders">The BISON E-learning platform to guide relevant stakeholders through huge amounts of information</h2>

As shown in the Figure 1 the matrix involves both blocks of knowledge.
For example, the module for Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA)
includes comprehensive knowledge on SEA related to transport and
biodiversity protection. On the other hand, modules for NGOs include
selected knowledge across all thematic blocks related to transport
development and biodiversity protection addressing specifics of each
theme relevant for NGOs. This matrix shows the basic working principle
of the e-learning platform. For road specialists looking for more
in-depth knowledge, it will also be possible to refer to the handbook
website which will contain a specific category on transport
infrastructure includes case studies like road infrastructure.

The ambition of the BISON E-learning Platform is not to educate experts
in dealing with the transport development of biodiversity protection,
nor with their harmonization. The goal is to guide relevant stakeholders
through huge amounts of information via sorting, interlinking,
structuralizing, comprising and prioritizing them in a user-friendly
online environment. Each stakeholder will be guided through the line of
most important information for one's position or interest allowing one
to use additional links to original knowledge resources for detailed
research.

![platform's screenshot](/images/about-e-learning/screenshot.png)

<h2 id="best-practicies">The BISON E-learning platform offers online courses and best practices from other EU funded projects</h2>

This platform will facilitate the connection and collaboration between
road experts and biodiversity experts in several ways. Firstly, the
platform offer support for courses and programs launched by universities
and other educational establishments that cover topics relevant to both
fields, providing opportunities for experts to exchange knowledge, and
learn from each other's perspectives. Secondly, it has ambition to
launch online communities where experts can meet with each other, ask
questions, and share resources. Thirdly, experts will have the
possibility to participate in webinars or online events, which can serve
as a platform for learning and exchanging insights. Lastly, experts can
participate on creating and sharing the relevant and complementary
content on the platform under the supervision and control of
[STUBA/SPECTRA](https://spectra-perseus.org/), such as video lectures, blog posts, or podcasts, to
connect with other learners and promote interdisciplinary learning.
Overall, the e-learning platform can play a vital role in fostering
collaboration and knowledge exchange between experts in different
fields, including road and biodiversity experts.

The e-learning platform, in addition to the mediation of selected
needs-oriented information for stakeholders' groups create the
integrative environment for access to the knowledge and best practices
derived in the BISON project in the interaction with the knowledge
available as the outputs from other EU funded Interreg and HORIZON
projects such as [TRANSGREEN](https://www.interreg-danube.eu/approved-projects/transgreen), [ConnectGREEN](https://www.interreg-danube.eu/approved-projects/connectgreen) and [INSPIRATION](http://www.inspiration-agenda.eu/at-a-glance.html).
TRANSGREEN and ConnectGREEN are two projects aimed at improving
transportation infrastructure in the mountainous regions of the Danube
Basin, with a special focus on the Carpathian Mountains. The goal is to
develop safer and environmentally friendly road and rail networks by
incorporating elements of Green Infrastructure and ecological corridors.
ConnectGREEN specifically aims to increase the capacity for ecological
corridors identification and management to ensure ecological
connectivity in the Carpathians. Both projects provide valuable
knowledge and experience to spatial planners and stakeholders to find
the best ways to develop infrastructure while preserving wildlife
conservation. These projects will also be linked to the INSPIRATION
Horizon project, which aims to establish and promote the adoption of
knowledge creation, transfer, and implementation for land use, land-use
changes, and soil management to address current and future societal
challenges. The methodology of INSPIRATION is based on a
multi-stakeholder, interdisciplinary approach that involves public
bodies, businesses, science, citizens, and society.

The [STUBA](https://www.stuba.sk/english) team are currently working intensely on developing the
platform and making sure it meets the high standards for quality and
user experience. The platform will be launched approximately after the
outputs from the BISON project are finalized. After the conclusion of
the project, the BISON outputs will be placed within the existing
platform working setup. This approximately planned to take place by
October 2023. Until then, the platform will continue to expand and
update. The platform is aimed to be a sustainable and lively learning
space after the end of the project, which will continue to get shaped
step by step. We look forward to bringing you a top-notch e-learning
experience soon.
