---
title: "Module 0: Introduction"
description: "Restoring and managing ecological corridors in mountains as the green
infrastructure in the danube basin"
tags: notes
date: 2021-12-12
order: 0
eleventyNavigation:
    key: Module_0
    parent: Decision_makers
layout: layouts/post.njk
---

**RESTORING AND MANAGING ECOLOGICAL CORRIDORS IN MOUNTAINS AS THE GREEN
INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE DANUBE BASIN**

-   **The principal Module for the harmonization of the biodiversity and
    Spatial Planning processes**

## 1 Advice

Before you attempt to study this e-learning course modules, please make
sure that you understand the entire project ConectGREEN. Lots of a
complementary knowledge which will help you to understand the course can
be derived from studying the recommended readings and materials. For
understanding this Module effectively and retaining the target groups'
interest, you need to include, where ever you can, local examples of
good or bad practice. Use also your specific professional knowledge to
illustrate the points and findings arising from videos. You can also
contact the author of the e-learning course and ask for a consultation.

## 2 Tasks for self-study

For the self-study we recommend several materials which are connected
with following modules:

-   The ConnectGREEN project\`s deliverables especially the strategic
    > materials

-   The materials deepening the knowledge about the concept of
    > ecological corridors and biodiversity

-   The materials deepening the knowledge about multiactors decision
    > making

-   The materials dealing with the assessment of green infrastructure

-   The materials dealing with urban landscape quality aspects and
    > quality of life aspects

-   Formal and informal instruments in respective planning culture used
    > for optimization of biodiversity

-   National specific materials on Spatial Planning processes and
    > biodiversity

These are some other tasks we recommend you to undertake:

-   Discuss with others the awareness on the disharmonization of
    biodiversity and spatial planning within professional planners´
    community

-   Discuss with others the context of biodiversity concept\`s issues
    under specific local conditions

-   Discuss with others what are the main political and methodological
    approaches in the field of green infrastructure management

-   Survey the available books, WebPages, articles, concerning the best
    practice in the field of implementing ecological corridors

-   Discuss with others and write down the lessons what to do and what
    not to do that you learned while researching the case studies

## SIDE INFORMATION

The Danube-Carpathian region is one of Europe´s last remaining
strongholds for the large carnivore species: grey wolf, Eurasian lynx
and brown bear, protected under EU law. Unfortunately, the planned
infrastructure developments threaten to cut through the movement
corridors of large carnivores and increase the fragmentation of their
habitats.

![](/notes/media/0_image1.jpeg)

Source: Photo © Thomas Hulik/WWF

Very few spatial planners have the knowledge and experience to ensure
that conflicts between development and nature conservation are minimized
as they develop new plans. More importantly, legally binding mechanisms
taking into consideration the requirements of functioning ecological
corridors are poorly implemented, mainly because of the lack of reliable
data. These effects require a coherent transnational approach as the
large carnivores frequently move across state borders in search of food,
mates or other needs.

Thorough ConnectGREEN project, partners from different countries and
various fields of activity (spatial planning, research, government,
biodiversity conservation) joined forces to increase the capacity of
ecological corridors identification and management and to overcome the
conflict between infrastructure development and wildlife conservation.
Valuable knowledge and experience will be made available to spatial
planners and vice versa for finding the best ways to develop
infrastructure and other plans in order secure ecological connectivity
in the Carpathians.

## GENERAL PROJECT OBJECTIVES

The main objective of ConnectGREEN project, which lasts from 2018 to
2021 is to maintain, respectively improve the ecological connectivity
between natural habitats, especially between Natura 2000 sites and other
protected areas of transnational relevance in the Carpathian ecoregion,
namely in Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania, Slovakia, Serbia and
Ukraine.

![](/notes/media/0_image2.png)

Source: Photo © Mac Stone/WWF-US

Specifically, the project aims at:

-   Developing innovative solutions and guidance to identify ecological
    corridors and connectivity gaps in a harmonized way across the
    Carpathian ecoregion to maintain long-term, cross-border wildlife
    movement, associated ecosystem services and a high level of
    biodiversity in the region.

-   Engaging protected area and Natura 2000 site managers,
    conservationists, spatial planners and other key stakeholders in an
    integrated approach for strengthening the capacity for identifying
    and managing ecological corridors.

-   Reconciling nature conservation and spatial planning and development
    in ecological corridors and Natura 2000 sites by identifying and
    implementing strategic directions and instruments and practices.

## LONG TERM SOLUTIONS FOR WILDLIFE MOVEMENTS

The ecological corridors will be identified in more detail by using the
new Carpathian-wide methodology in 4 transnationally relevant pilot
sites:

1. Piatra Craiului National Park (Romania);

2. Apuseni-SW Carpathians (Romania) / National Park Djerdap (Serbia);

3. Western Carpathians (Czech Republic -- Slovakia)

4. Bükk National Park (Hungary) / Cerová vrchovina Protected Landscape
    Area (Slovakia)

![](/notes/media/0_image3.png)

Source: Photo © Interreg Danube Transnational Programme

Maintaining or restoring ecological corridors will secure a viable
population of large carnivores in the Carpathians and maintain one of
the largest biodiversity hotspots and functioning ecosystems on the
continent. Moreover, this new joint approach is meant to accelerate the
implementation processes and put into practice much-awaited
infrastructure developments that faces the risk of being delayed due to
non-conformity with safety and environmental standards.

## WEB REFERENCES

http://www.alpenkarpetenkorridor.at, Alpen-Karpaten-Korridor

http://europa.eu, Europäische Union

http://www.bmvit.gv.at, Bundesministerium für Verkehr, Innovation und
Technologie

http://www.burgenland.at, Land Burgenland

http://www.interreg-danube.eu/

http://www.noel.gv.at, Land Niederösterreich

http://www.raumordnung-noe.at, Raumordnung Niederösterreich
