---
title: "Module 1: Spatial Planning"
description: "General information about spatial planning"
tags: notes
date: 2021-12-12
order: 1
eleventyNavigation:
    key: Module_1
    parent: Decision_makers
layout: layouts/post.njk
---

Governance of urban development is not possible to separate from the
global world changes, since globalisation seriously affects the local
changes and influence of the local politicians is more and more affected
by external processes and powers. Right governance of the city and good
political decisions often taken under high level of complexity and
uncertainty must be supported by professionally well-prepared documents.
There is a need for continual, complex and updated information, for
assessment of indicators of the quality of urban life as well as
submitting the alternative solutions of development of different spheres
of urban life. Important parts of these instruments are spatial planning
instruments. Spatial planning instruments are long-term instruments of
regulation of territorial development.

Spatial planning represents a broad scale of planning activities,
differing in the scope of complexity, spatial ties, methods and tools
but also in the planning doctrines bound not only to the social system.
Territorial communities at the levels of the towns and regions that form
the basis of urban society and the space to fulfil the principles of
urban democracy are the base for spatial and sectoral integration of the
planning activities of various subjects. These are primarily the
regional and urban systems in which the different sectoral planning
activities, representing often controversial and partial interests in
the territory, meet and which are dominant for safeguarding the
sustainability of development in the sense of the rule: "Think globally,
act locally".

Transformation of the society in Slovakia as well as European
integration of Slovakia brings the changes in the conditions not only of
settlement structure, but in the conditions, objectives and principles
of its management. Adoption of the new concept of decentralisation and
modernisation of public administration, the establishment of the second
level of government and the shift of more than 300 competencies from the
state administration to the municipalities and regions, strengthen not
only the position of elected representatives in the state to the
detriment of the representatives of executive but creates new and better
conditions for participation of the public and private (entrepreneurial,
civic) sector in the development of municipalities and regions after
1989. Thus, the requirement of decentralisation and delegation of the
power from the state administration to territorial self-government is
being fulfilled, but it does not remove the numerous competences that
are divided between the state administration and self-government, with
impact on efficacy, flexibility and rationality of public administration
as the whole system. The mentioned changes affect new urban governance
in the Slovak Republic substantially and increase the responsibility of
the bodies of local and regional self-government for the development of
the municipalities, regions and thus of the whole Slovak Republic. In
the governance of urban development, the public sector insufficiently
and often formally communicates with private sector. The change in the
attitudes is gradual and particularly in these localities where the
civic society well organised in the NGOs.

It is so especially in the urban areas and in the areas with higher
educational structure. The change in the background conditions, along
with the increased responsibility of the local councils brings also the
requirements for changes in communication between the public and the
private sector.

The planning activities/policies, can be identified in 5 main stages and
3 levels, as follows:

1. stage: supranational -- European Union, European Commission, UN, ECE
UN,

2. stage: national -- parliament, government,

3. stage: regional -- regional governments,

4. stage: supralocal -- microregions, associations of municipalities,

4.a stage: local -- local governments, municipalities,

5. stage: sublocal -- business and other subjects.

These 5 stages overlap 3 main pillars of the system of complex spatial
development management consisting of:

1. Spatial relevant planning activities -- spatial planning

- Integrative planning activities represented by

    -   landscape planning

    -   socioeconomic strategic development planning

    -   land use planning

-   Sectoral planning activities like transport planning,
    infrastructural planning

2. Spatial monitoring and information management system

3. Spatial management -- implementation control system

Figure 1: The system of spatial development management in Slovakia

![](/notes/media/1_image1.png)

Source: Scheme Â© Finka, M.; et al.; 2011

## Strategic socio-economic development planning

Current stage in the progression of strategic development planning is
characterised by searching for optimal tools, methods and system
relations, either vertical / hierarchic or horizontal, with other
planning activities and primarily with land-use planning.

The basic documents of cross-sectoral strategic development planning are
the National Strategy of Regional Development, including the Strategic
Sectoral Plans, the regional operational programmes and the programmes
of social development and economic development of self-governmental
districts and municipalities. The National Strategy defines as the
primary task of regional policy of the Slovak Republic: gradual
equalisation between the regions, socio-economic cohesion and increase
in living standard of population.

## Landscape planning

Landscape planning in Slovakia does not create institutionally unified
system. It is understood as the system of integrative and in the same
time specific planning activities integrated into the different parts of
spatial development planning and management system.

Landscape planning in Slovakia is based on long tradition of
landscape-ecological and human-ecological assessment of the landscape;
orientated towards ecological optimization of landscape use based on the
co-ordination of present and proposed activities with landscape
relevance following the goals of sustainable development and
safeguarding the landscape ecological stability, efficient use of
natural resources, preservation of cultural and natural heritage
including the landscape character. Land-use planning in this context
seems to be the tool for the spatial and spatial-temporal integration at
the highest level as it has to integrate all different interests in the
space and time represented by different stakeholders, different sectors
of activities, of different wage and priorities, different spatial
effects, different length etc.

In the land-use planning creates the platform for the efficient transfer
of the landscape sustainable development interest from the professional
sphere into the society development management, from professional
planning documents into the political decisions and from partial
political decisions towards comprehensive territorial governance. In
this position the land-use planning as the part of spatial planning
system can be understood as the crucial instrument for the
implementation of landscape convention in Europe.

## Land-use planning

Land-use planning in the Slovak Republic is continual and systematic
activity, thanks to preserving its rational, but in the period of
socialism partially politically deformed, matter which covers the issues
of planning of complex spatial development at the zonal, local, regional
and national levels in the crossing activities of inventories, analyses,
planning, decision-making and monitoring, but up to now without
opportunities for active territorial management.

Similarly to other developed countries, also in the Slovak Republic
land-use planning is implemented in unity of the principles of
subsidiarity and planning sovereignty of the basic spatial planning
units -- municipalities.

Land-use planning systematically and comprehensively addresses the
spatial arrangement and functional use of land, lays down its
principles, it is proposed the material and chronological coordination
of activities which influence environment, ecological stability,
cultural-historical values of land, land development and landscape in
accordance with the principles of permanently sustainable development.
Land-use planning creates the conditions for permanent harmony of all
activities in the territory with particular regard to care for the
environment, reaching the ecological balance and ensuring permanently
sustainable development, desirable using the natural resources and
protection of natural, civilizational and cultural values.

Land-use planning includes these tasks and activities:

- it determines the directions of spatial arrangement and functional
    land-use,

- it determines the necessary interventions to land for sanitation,
    reconstruction or recultivation purposes and determines the manner
    of its further use,

- it defines protected areas, protected buildings, quiet areas and
    protective zones ("hereinafter only protected areas of land"),
    unless they originate under other regulations, and ensures the
    protection of all protected areas of the land,

- it determines the principles and conditions for the material and
    chronological co-ordination of locally concentrated construction by
    one or several developers,

- it assesses and evaluates the land-technical effects of buildings
    that are prepared and other measures in the land and proposes their
    scope condition their environmental suitable and safe use,

- it regulates the location of buildings, determines the
    land-technical, urban and architectonic and environmental
    requirements for their projection and realisation,

- it determines the principles of the use of natural resources, land
    conditions and whole environment in order that the activities within
    it do not exceed the acceptable load of land, so that it is created
    and preserved the ecological stability of the land,

- creates the necessary materials for the creation of overall
    construction plans and the technical provision of an area,

- proposes the order of construction and the use of land,

- proposes the land-technical and organisational measures necessary
    for improvement of environment, achievement of ecological stability
    and ensuring the permanently sustainable development.

The community objectives are projected into the objectives of planning
documentation. This should ensure not only spatial conditions of
sustainable development, access to social and technical infrastructure,
quality of environment in all parts of territory, but it also guarantees
the priority of social goals with respect to the goals of all individual
subjects.

Land-use planning plays special role in co-ordination of various
interests in the territory (e.g. in the municipality or in the region),
but also between the economic sectors (water management, agriculture,
transport and others) and between the sectors of services (health care,
social welfare, education, trade) and the private subjects of business
and non-profit character and individual citizens. Land-use planning
itself as a system of legally defined rules and processes guarantees,
respecting social equity in relation to protection of ownership of
property also with regard to public interests in various spheres of
social life, from environment through accessibility of education and
social services up to development of minor social groups.

The basic tools of land-use planning are land-use planning materials,
land-use planning documentation and land use decisions. Land-use
planning materials comprises mainly:

a)  An urban study, covering partial problems in the area in question.
    It is produced in preparation of land-use plan as a proposal of
    concept of spatial arrangement and functional use of land or for
    making the land plan more detailed or verification of land plan and
    in case of amendment of land plan or for solution of some specific
    land technical, landscape-ecological, environmental or architectonic
    problems in land as a basis for land-use decision-making or if it is
    stipulated otherwise in special regulation.

b)  A land-use general plan addresses the possibilities of long-term
    spatial arrangement and functional use of land. It is elaborated on
    the basis of analyse and evaluation of land-technical conditions,
    environmental conditions and social conditions of land as well as on
    the basis of analysis and evaluation of land system of ecological
    stability, tendencies of land development and environmental care.

c)  Land technical materials, specifically focused and systematically
    compiled and updated sets of data characterising the state and
    conditions prevailing in an area, are produced for the whole
    territory of the Slovak Republic and for selected territorial units.

d)  Other materials used for the production of the land-use planning
    documentation and are produced particularly for the creation and
    protection of the living environment, the protection of nature and
    the creation of the landscape, the protection of cultural and
    historical heritage and technical and transport infrastructure.

The actual planning tool of land-use planning is the land-use planning
documentation, represented by the Conception of Territorial Development
of Slovakia, by regional land-use plans, municipal land-use plans and
zone plans. The land-use planning documentation represents the basic
tool of land development and environmental care of the Slovak Republic,
regions and communes. The departmental overall plans of the central
bodies of state administration and overall plans for development of
communes and other programs regarding economic, social or cultural
development must be in accordance with the binding parts of the land-use
planning documentation:

1.  Conception of Territorial Development of Slovakia is elaborated for
    the whole territory of the Slovak Republic. It solves the spatial
    arrangement and functional use of land of the Slovak Republic and
    establishes the framework of social, economic, environmental and
    cultural requirements of state for land development, environmental
    care and creation of landscape of the Slovak Republic and its
    regions. The strategy of land development of the Slovakia represents
    the land technical material for its elaboration.

2.  Regional land-use plan is elaborated for part of country with
    several communes in which it is necessary to solve specific
    development projects or carry out the activities markedly affecting
    the spatial arrangement and functional use of land. The land-use
    plan of region must be in accordance with the binding part of the
    Overall plan for development of the Slovakia.

3.  Land-use plan of a municipality is elaborated for the land of one
    commune or for the land of two or several communes. Land-use plan of
    commune establishes in particular:

-   principles and limits of spatial arrangement and functional use of
    territory of commune in connection with the surrounding territory,

-   permissible, limited and prohibited functional use of areas,

-   principles and directions or environmental care, land system of
    ecological stability including green areas,

-   principles and directions of protection and use of natural
    resources, cultural-historical values and important landscape
    elements,

-   boundaries between continuously built-up area of commune or the area
    determined for building-up (hereinafter only "built up area") and
    other area of commune,

-   principles and directions of public transport and technical
    facilities and civil facilities,

-   areas for public buildings, for carrying out the sanitation and for
    protected part of land.

4.  Land-use plan of a zone is produced for self-contained parts of a
    settlement formation, especially for its industrial, dwelling,
    central and historical parts and parts of a recreational or
    landscape unit, or for the whole area of a small settlement
    formation, with the aim of providing detailed directions and limits
    for the functional and spatial arrangement of the location of
    buildings. Land-use plan of zone establishes especially:

-   principles and directions of spatial arrangement and functional use
    of lands, buildings and public and technical facilities of the
    territory,

-   principles and directions of location of buildings in particular
    lands, into the urban areas and building-up conditions of individual
    building lands,

-   lands that are in the built-up area of the commune, buildings on
    lands and portion of possible building-up and acceptability of
    territory use,

-   unbuilt-up lands as building lands including determination of lands
    that according to land-use plan cannot be permanently ranked among
    building lands,

-   protected parts of land,

-   principles and directions of inevitable facilities of buildings and
    connection to public transport and technical facilities of the area,

-   principles and directions of inclusion of buildings into the
    surrounding development, into monumental reservations, into
    monumental zones and into other landscape,

-   location of lawn and planting, important landscape elements and
    other elements of ecological stability on individual lands,

-   material and chronological co-ordination of new development and
    sanitation of existing buildings,

-   lands for public buildings, building enclosure and for carrying out
    the sanitation.

The land-use planning documentation consists of binding part and guiding
part. The approving authority determines the binding part and guiding
part of land-use planning documentation. In the binding part it
determines always public buildings and protected parts of landscape.

Land-use planning authorities are required to procure land-use planning
documentation in conformity with the needs of development of the area
and environmental care within an appropriate and economically feasible
scope. Land-use plans of communes and land-use plans of zones are always
procured for the construction of new communes, for the location of
public buildings and for the material reconstruction, completion or
sanitation of existing communes or parts thereof, with the aim to
improve environment, to ensure ecological stability and permanently
sustainable development.

Procurement of land-use planning documentation includes:

-   preparation works,

-   ensuring the processing of researches and analyses,

-   ensuring the processing of commission and its reviewing,

-   ensuring the processing of the draft of solution of land-use
    planning documentation (hereinafter only "draft") supervision over
    its processing and its reviewing,

-   ensuring the processing of the proposal of land-use planning
    documentation, supervision over its processing and its reviewing,

-   preparation of materials for approving of the proposal of land-use
    planning documentation,

-   ensuring the statement of binding part of land-use planning
    documentation, deposition of land-use planning documentation and
    issuing of registration form and its delivery to the Ministry.

The siting of buildings, the changing of land-use type and the
protection of important interests in the territory are possible only on
the basis of a land-use decision, which may be:

a)  a decision on the siting of a building,

b)  a decision on the use of land,

c)  a decision on a protected area or on a protective zone,

d)  a decision on a building enclosure.

In the land-use decision the building office shall delineate the area
for the proposed purpose and shall prescribe the conditions which are to
ensure the interests of the public in the area, especially conformance
with the aims and objectives of land-use planning, the material and
temporal co-ordination of individual buildings and other measures in the
area and above all care for the environment including architecturally
and urbanistically valuable objects in the area and shall rule on the
objections brought by the participants of the proceedings. In the
decision on the siting of a building the building office in justified
cases may reserve the right to request submission of more detailed
materials, project documentation or parts thereof; in accordance with
these it may then prescribe further conditions which must be included in
the building permission.

A decision on the siting of a building determines the building land, the
building is located in it, there are stated the conditions for sitting
of a building, the requirements for content of project documentation and
period of validity of the decision. By the decision on the use of land
it is permitted the new use of area, there are stated its conditions and
duration of its validity. Decision on protected part of land states its
boundaries, prohibits or limits certain activities for the reasons of
public interest and determines the conditions of its protection,
especially the activities that cannot be carried out in the area and
those that may be performed only provided meeting of certain conditions.
By the decision on building enclosure it is determined the area in which
it is temporary prohibited or restricted the building activity,
especially if it could cause difficulties or make the future use of area
impossible or its organization according to the prepared land-use plan.

Primarily public participation and the approving powers of the councils
as the pillars of democracy are the presumptions of optimisation of the
planning documents in relation to safeguarding of social participation.
The planning sovereignty of municipalities along with the principle of
subsidiarity are of special significance. In accordance with the result
of researches and analyses the land-use planning authority that procures
the land-use planning documentation, ensures the processing of the
commission. The commission includes especially the main aims and
requirements that should be solved in the procured land-use planning
documentation and detailed requirements regarding the form, scope and
content of processing of land-use planning documentation.

The commission is reviewed by the respective land-use planning authority
who procures the land-use planning documentation with the relevant
communes, with the relevant self-governing regions and with the relevant
legal persons and it shall agree with the relevant authorities. The
communes shall review the commission for land-use plan of commune and
the commission for the land-use plan of zone with the regional building
office. The way of negotiation of the commission for the Overall plan of
development of the Slovakia is determined by the Ministry.

Public will be informed on reviewing of the commission of land-use plan
by the land-use planning authority who procures the land-use planning
documentation, namely in effective form and way that is usual in the
respective locality. The commission draft must be displayed for public
inspection. Public is entitled to submit comments on the commission
draft within 30 days from the date of notification. The procurer shall
determine the adequate deadline for commission reviewing that must not
be less than 30 days from the date of delivery of the notice on
reviewing of the commission draft. If the relevant commune, the relevant
self-governing region documentation at the regional and local levels is
declaration of the public works that directly or indirectly support
safeguarding of social equity.

Land-use planning is a tool of the planning policy. The value system of
the society is being projected into the legally defined priorities and
objectives of planning, meeting of which is controlled at all levels by
the state. Approval of the plan that is the key instrument of planning
is the decision of the council and is of legal effect in the respective
area, but only under the condition of its accordance with the objectives
and rights guaranteed by the state. The state as guarantor of the public
interest plays an important role in spite of the planning sovereignty of
the municipalities.

## Recommended readings:

-   Finka, M.; PetrÃ­kovÃ¡, D.; JameÄnÃ½, Ä½.; et al. 2011. PriestorovÃ©
    plÃ¡novanie. Bratislava : Road, 2011. 240 s. ISBN 978-80-88999-39-3.

-   Finka, M, PetrÃ­kovÃ¡ D., Eds., 2000. Spatial Development and Planning
    in European Integration. FA STU-ROAD Bratislava.

-   Finka, M., PÅikryl, Z., Scholich, D., Turowski, G. 1997.
    Deutsch-Slowakisch-Tschechisches Handbuch der Planungsbegriffe /
    Slovensko-Äesko-nemeckÃ¡ prÃ­ruÄka Ãºzemno-plÃ¡novacej terminolÃ³gie /
    Äesko-nÄmecko-slovenskÃ¡ pÅÃ­ruÄka ÃºzemnÄ plÃ¡novacÃ­ terminologie, ARL
    Hannover/ROAD Bratislava, ISBN 3-88838-521-0.

-   Finka, M., PÅikryl, Z., Semsroth, K. 2000.
    Ãsterreichisch-Slowakisch-Tschechisches Handbuch der
    Raumplanungsbegriffe/Slovensko-Äesko-rakÃºska prÃ­ruÄka
    ÃºzemnoplÃ¡novacej terminolÃ³gie / Äesko-rakousko-slovenskÃ¡ pÅÃ­ruÄka
    ÃºzemnÄ plÃ¡novacÃ­ terminologie, ARL Hannover, ISBN 3-88838-528-8.
