---
title: "Module 2: Need for the Harmonization"
description: "The overriding objective of the Alpine-Carpathian Corridor project is to
implement sectoral and transboundary activities to ensure the
interconnection of living spaces along the corridor linking the Alps and
the Carpathians in order to ensure sustainable development in this area
by better balancing the different demands for this space"
tags: notes
date: 2021-12-12
order: 2
layout: layouts/post.njk
---

The largest mountain chains in Europe, represented by the Alps and the
Carpathians, which belong to the species richest ecosystems on earth,
are connected by the traditional migration ways of numerous wild animals
of the highest importance. These internationally important routes run
from the eastern alpine foothills of Austria through Rosaliengebierte,
through Leithagebirege, Maria Ellender Wald, through the floodplain
forests of the Danube and the Morava River, the Záhorie Lowland to the
Small Carpathians. Not long ago, large mammals living in forests such as
deer, wolf, bear or lynx and with them a wide variety of other forest
animal species could migrate without difficulty through the corridor
between the Alps and the Carpathians. Today, this corridor runs through
one of the most economically dynamic regions in Europe -- the
metropolitan region of Vienna - Bratislava - Györ. Intensive land use,
top-class roads and built-up areas, as well as intensive agricultural
land use have significantly affected the important functions of this
corridor. The progressive urbanization of the landscape and the
construction of technical and transport infrastructure, mainly
represented by motorways, interrupt traditional animal migration ways in
many places. There is a risk that migration between animal populations
will stop as a result of these barriers and their habitats will be
confined to some isolated islands. Consequently, the lack of genetic
exchange may result in depletion and subsequent extinction of smaller
populations.

The Alpine-Carpathian Corridor project supports the objectives of the
Alpine Convention, the Bonn Convention for the Conservation of Migrant,
Wildlife and, last but not least, the Convention on Biological
Diversity. The project has a wide international response, e.g. within
the framework of the European Danube Strategy and cooperates with other
projects of similar focus. The Alpine-Carpathian Corridor, alongside the
Green Belt along the former Iron Curtain, is an important migration
route of European dimension. The European Union has committed Member
States to support the landscape elements linking the Natura 2000 sites,
even if these elements have not been assessed as valuable habitats to
date.

The overriding objective of the Alpine-Carpathian Corridor project is to
implement sectoral and transboundary activities to ensure the
interconnection of living spaces along the corridor linking the Alps and
the Carpathians in order to ensure sustainable development in this area
by better balancing the different demands for this space. In cooperation
with nature conservation and spatial planning in Austria and Slovakia,
together with partners from the fields of transport, agriculture and
forestry, hunting and tourism, but especially in cooperation with
municipalities, concrete measures should be defined and modelled to
ensure the functioning of the bio-corridor between Alps and Carpathians.
Through the localization of green bridges over motorways corresponding
to the migratory behaviour of wild animals, the permeability of the
Alpine-Carpathian Corridor should be achieved and thus the genetic
exchange among wildlife populations should be improved.

**LINEAR TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROCESSES AS THE OBJECTS
OF HARMONIZATION WITH WILDLIFE**

The most efficient way, how to avoid or to minimise the conflicts and
negative effects of the transport on the wildlife is reflection of the
needs to protect the wildlife in the processes of the development of the
transport infrastructure.

The effects and potentials for their minimizing differ depending on
transport mode (car transport, pedestrian transport, bicycle transport,
railways, air transport, cable lines, pipelines, waterways and
channels), geographical contexts (landscape features, modes of use of
the territory) and element of transport infrastructure. These guidelines
are focused on linear infrastructure represented predominantly by
different categories of roads and railway lines (including supportive
and complementary infrastructural elements like crossings, stops,
stations, bridges, tunes etc.) as they are most common among transport
infrastructure in the countryside and to big extend representative in
dealing with the conflicts between transport infrastructure and wildlife

The process of the development of the roads and railway lines is very
similar and includes the logic of steps starting with the scoping, via
planning, designing, construction and use/maintenance and monitoring.

![](/notes/media/2_image1.emf)

Detailed look at the content of these phases shows differences depending
of the kick-of situation. Based on this we can distinguish basically 3
modes of development processes:

A.  [Development of new roads and railway lines or their
    parts]{.underline}

The overall flow of logically interlinked steps is represented by the
phases shown in the following diagram:

![](/notes/media/2_image2.emf)

B.  [Update of existing roads and railways (modernising, extension in
    former corridors, increase of capacities, speed ...)]{.underline}

The processes of the development of linear transport infrastructure via
update of existing roads and railways have following specifics in the
comparison with the new infrastructure development:

The logic scheme of the process of the roads and railways development
focused on update of existing infrastructure is specific by the
integration of the phases of planning and projecting as the strategic
dimension of those phases is limited by absence of the localisation
decisions.

![](/notes/media/2_image3.emf)

C.  [Improving ecological status of existing routes and
    railways]{.underline}

Development of the linear transport infrastructure via improving its
ecological status of existing routes and railways is a specific case of
up-date of the infrastructure. As in some cases the efficiency of the
particular technical interventions implemented directly on the road /
railway line depends on supportive interventions in broader area, the
process has to include the planning and implementing ecologic,
managerial and organisational intervention in broader area.

![](/notes/media/2_image4.png)
![](/notes/media/2_image5.emf)

## Recommended readings:

-   Maros Finka; et al. 2019. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science
    and Engineering 471 092055. \[ONLINE\] available at:
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/331313992_Linear_Transport_Infrastructure_Development_Processes_as_the_Objects_of_Harmonisation_with_Wildlife
    \[accessed March 15, 2020\]

-   Trangreen Project Consortium (2019) Wildlife and Traffic in the
    Carpathians: Guidelines how to minimize the impact of transport
    infrastructure development on nature in the Carpathian countries
    \[ONLINE\] available at:
    http://www.interregdanube.eu/uploads/media/approved_project_output/0001/35/02caaafe3c
    1c1365f76574e754ddbdc4e1af4a7a.pdf \[accessed March 10, 2020\]

-   Debinski, D.M., Holt, R.D. 2000. A Survey and Overview of Habitat
    Fragmentation Experiments. Conservation Biology, 342-355.

-   Hilty, A., Jodi, L. W. 2006. Corridor Ecology: The Science and
    Practice of Linking Landscapes for Biodiversity Conservation.
    Berkeley: Island Press.

-   Iuell, B., Bekker, H., et al. 2003. Wildllife and Traffic. A
    European Handbook for Identifying Conflicts and Designing Solutions.

-   Jongmann, G. 2001. Ecological Networks and greenways: Concept,
    design, implementation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
    Cambridge.
