---
layout: layouts/page-toc.njk
block_name: "block_climate"
description: "This module has been elaborated building up on BISON project outputs, especially Deliverable D3.4 “Report on emerging trends and future challenges” and complementary resources are listed as footnotes in relevant places."
---

<h2 id="introduction">Short introduction on the relationship between concepts</h2>

Climate change, biodiversity, and eco-connectivity are intrinsically
linked, forming a delicate web of interdependencies in our natural
world. Climate change, driven by human activities such as burning fossil
fuels and deforestation, has profound effects on both biodiversity and
eco-connectivity.

At its core, climate change alters temperature and precipitation
patterns, leading to shifts in ecosystems and threatening the survival
of numerous species. Rising temperatures disrupt the delicate balance
within ecosystems, affecting the timing of key life cycle events such as
migration, reproduction, and hibernation. This can lead to mismatches in
timing between species, causing negative cascading effects throughout
the food chain.

Biodiversity, the incredible array of life on Earth, plays a vital role
in mitigating and adapting to climate change. Diverse ecosystems are
better equipped to withstand and recover from environmental
disturbances. The presence of a variety of species ensures functional
resilience and enhances ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration,
water filtration, and pollination. Biodiversity acts as nature\'s
insurance policy, providing buffers against the impacts of climate
change and supporting human well-being.

Eco-connectivity refers to the interconnectedness of ecosystems,
enabling the movement of species across landscapes. It involves
maintaining and restoring corridors, such as rivers, forests, or green
spaces, that allow for the free flow of genes, individuals, and
ecological processes. These corridors enable species to adapt to
changing climatic conditions by seeking suitable habitats and
establishing new populations. They also facilitate genetic exchange,
helping populations maintain genetic diversity, which is essential for
resilience and adaptation.

However, climate change poses significant challenges to
eco-connectivity. As habitats shift due to changing climatic conditions,
species often struggle to keep pace. Fragmentation and loss of habitats
can isolate populations, leading to reduced genetic diversity and
increasing the risk of local extinctions. Disrupted eco-connectivity can
hinder the ability of species to migrate and adapt, ultimately
threatening their survival.

To address these intertwined challenges, it is crucial to adopt holistic
approaches that prioritize the conservation and restoration of both
biodiversity and eco-connectivity. Conservation efforts should focus on
protecting intact ecosystems, restoring degraded habitats, and creating
ecological corridors. By safeguarding biodiversity and promoting
eco-connectivity, we can enhance the resilience of ecosystems in the
face of climate change, protect vulnerable species, and ensure the
long-term sustainability of our planet.

<h2 id="climate-change">Climate change</h2>

Climate change is a complex and rapidly evolving topic, and scientific
research continues to advance our understanding of its causes, impacts,
and potential solutions. Here are some of the key findings and trends
based on scientific research.

1. Human-induced Climate Change: The scientific consensus is clear that
climate change is primarily caused by human activities, particularly the
burning of fossil fuels and deforestation, which release greenhouse
gases (GHGs) into the atmosphere. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) has repeatedly emphasized the human influence on global
warming.
Current status and trends have been synthesized and reported especially
for the policy-makers most recently in March 2023 by [IPCC](https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/).

2. Temperature Rise: Global temperatures have been rising over the past
century, and the rate of warming has accelerated in recent decades. The
IPCC's Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) stated that the average global
surface temperature has increased by about 0.85 degrees Celsius since
the late 19th century, with most of the warming occurring since the
1970s.

3. Extreme Weather Events: Scientific research has linked climate
change to an increase in the frequency and intensity of certain extreme
weather events. Heatwaves, heavy precipitation, droughts, and tropical
cyclones are among the phenomena that have shown evidence of climate
change influence. However, attributing specific events to climate change
remains a challenging area of study.

4. Sea-Level Rise: Ongoing warming has led to the melting of glaciers
and ice caps, contributing to the rise in global sea levels. This poses
significant risks to coastal communities, infrastructure, and
ecosystems. The rate of sea-level rise has accelerated in recent decades
and is projected to continue, though the exact magnitude and timing of
future rise remain uncertain.

5. Impacts on Ecosystems and Biodiversity: Climate change affects
ecosystems and biodiversity in various ways. Shifts in temperature and
precipitation patterns can disrupt ecosystems, alter species
distributions, and cause habitat loss. Changes in phenology, such as
flowering and migration timings, can affect ecological interactions.
Ocean acidification, driven by increased carbon dioxide absorption,
poses a threat to marine ecosystems and species, particularly those
reliant on calcium carbonate structures like corals.

6. Socioeconomic Impacts: Climate change poses significant risks to
human societies, including impacts on food and water security, public
health, and economic stability. Vulnerable populations, such as those in
low-lying coastal areas or developing countries with limited adaptive
capacity, are particularly at risk.

7. Mitigation and Adaptation: Mitigating climate change requires
reducing GHG emissions through transitioning to cleaner energy sources,
increasing energy efficiency, and adopting sustainable practices across
sectors. Adaptation strategies aim to manage the risks and build
resilience to the changing climate. Both mitigation and adaptation
efforts are essential for addressing the challenges posed by climate
change.

It's important to note that new scientific findings and research
continue to emerge, and staying updated with the latest studies and
reports from reputable scientific sources, such as the IPCC, provides
the most accurate and comprehensive understanding of climate change.

From BISON project perspective, the central messages from the chapters
from the deliverable include underlined importance of
climate change and its impact:

1. Transportation technology is at the brink to a revolutionary change
that may lead to a more efficient, cleaner, equitable and resilient
sector where mobility is replaced by accessibility and (unnecessary)
transport demand is reduced. Still these benefits may not suffice to
compensate for the needs of the growing world population and increased
living standards. More and new infrastructure will be built and it will
crave inclusive and holistic approaches for people as well as for nature
to approach sustainability.

2. Climate change mitigation is now unquestioned and decarbonisation of
the transport sector is central to the concept of sustainable
development. However, to cope with the inevitable and existing impact on
people and ecosystems, transport infrastructures as well as many other
land use and engineering practices must adapt. These adaptation provide
certain opportunities to improve conditions for Deliverable D3.4 Report
on emerging trends and future challenges -- July 7, 2022 Page 10 of 125
biodiversity, but as with new infrastructure, it requires a holistic and
inclusive approach to benefit from these changes.

3. Nature-based Solutions provide a sustainable and economically viable
alternative to conventional technical approaches for the environmental
(and ecological) adaptation of infrastructure. They may not only assist
in coping with climate change but also help to integrate infrastructure
in the natural environment and reduce its negative impacts. Still, the
concept is rather new and more development and experience is needed to
obtain its full potential.

4. Triggered by climate change, habitat exploitation and expanding
transport, but also thanks to Naturebased Solutions and
restauration/conservation achievements, infrastructure managers will
increasingly have to deal with alien and native wildlife species some of
which may be of concern to infrastructure facilities or to biodiversity.
To control the biological threat and simultaneously provide for desired
species, cross-sector strategies for the monitoring and management of
biodiversity need to be developed and adopted.

5. Traditional impact assessment is not sufficient to address the large
scale and long term effects that accumulate from the various direct and
indirect effects of infrastructure development, climate change and their
repercussion on human societies. Evaluating the cumulative effects on
nature and people alike requires a holistic approach but also a
comprehensive monitoring system that also tracks the outcome of
mitigation attempts.

<h2 id="biodiversity">Biodiversity</h2>

Biodiversity refers to the variety and abundance of living organisms
present in a particular ecosystem, region, or the entire planet. It
encompasses the diversity of species, genetic variation within species,
and the variety of ecosystems and ecological processes that support
life.

At the species level, biodiversity refers to the number of different
species coexisting within a given area. It considers both the richness
(total number of species) and evenness (relative abundance of each
species) of the species present. High species diversity indicates a
greater number of species and a more balanced distribution among them.

Genetic diversity is another important aspect of biodiversity, focusing
on the genetic variation within species. It considers the different
alleles, or gene variants, present in a population, which contribute to
the adaptability and resilience of species. Higher genetic diversity
provides more options for species to respond to environmental changes
and reduces the risk of inbreeding and susceptibility to diseases.

Ecosystem diversity encompasses the range of habitats, ecological
communities, and interactions among species and their physical
environment. It includes diverse ecosystems such as forests, grasslands,
wetlands, coral reefs, and freshwater systems. Ecosystem diversity
contributes to the overall functioning of ecosystems, including nutrient
cycling, energy flow, and the provision of essential ecosystem services,
such as pollination, water purification, and climate regulation.

Biodiversity plays a fundamental role in maintaining the health and
stability of ecosystems. It contributes to the resilience of ecosystems
by enhancing their ability to withstand disturbances, adapt to changing
conditions, and recover from environmental stresses. Biodiversity also
underpins essential ecosystem services that support human well-being,
including food production, clean water, climate regulation, and cultural
values.

Understanding and conserving biodiversity is a central focus of academic
research in fields such as ecology, evolutionary biology, conservation
biology, and environmental science. Scientists employ various methods,
including field surveys, genetic analyses, ecological modeling, and
remote sensing, to assess and monitor biodiversity patterns, understand
the factors influencing biodiversity loss, and develop conservation
strategies to protect and restore biodiversity at local, regional, and
global scales.

*Reference* *readings*

-   [Sandström, U. G., & Elander, I. (2021).](/files/IslandandthePipelineFINAL.pdf) Biodiversity, road transport
    and urban planning: A Swedish local authority facing the challenge
    of establishing a logistics hub adjacent to a Natura 2000 site.
    Progress in Planning, 148, 100463.

-   [Spooner, P. (2015).](/files/2019BiodiversityDreamingbookchapterTSRpathways.pdf) Minor rural road networks: values, challenges,
    and opportunities for biodiversity conservation. Nature
    Conservation, 11, 129-142.

-   [Bennett, V. J. (2017).](/files/s40823-017-0020-6.pdf) Effects of road density and pattern on the
    conservation of species and biodiversity. Current Landscape Ecology
    Reports, 2, 1-11.

<h2 id="eco-connectivity">Eco-connectivity</h2>

Eco-connectivity, also known as ecological connectivity or landscape
connectivity, refers to the degree to which landscapes or ecosystems are
interconnected and allow for the movement of species, genetic material,
and ecological processes. It describes the functional and physical
linkages that enable organisms to move across habitats and landscapes,
facilitating migration, dispersal, and gene flow.

Eco-connectivity is essential for maintaining healthy and resilient
ecosystems. It allows species to access suitable habitats, find
resources, establish new populations, and respond to environmental
changes such as climate change. Connected landscapes enable the exchange
of genetic material between populations, promoting genetic diversity and
reducing the risk of inbreeding, which enhances the adaptive capacity of
species.

There are two primary forms of eco-connectivity: structural connectivity
and functional connectivity.

1. Structural Connectivity: This refers to the physical or geographical
elements that facilitate movement and dispersal of organisms. It
includes corridors, such as rivers, forests, or strips of habitat that
connect fragmented areas, as well as stepping stones, which are smaller
patches of suitable habitat within an otherwise unsuitable matrix.
Structural connectivity can also be achieved through the presence of
suitable habitat along migration routes or through natural features like
mountain ranges or coastlines.

2. Functional Connectivity: This encompasses the ecological processes
that enable species movement and interaction across landscapes. It
involves the functioning of ecosystems, including the flow of energy,
nutrients, and other ecological dynamics, which can influence species
movements and their ability to persist in a particular habitat.
Functional connectivity considers factors such as predator-prey
relationships, pollinator interactions, and dispersal mechanisms.

Maintaining and enhancing eco-connectivity is crucial for biodiversity
conservation and ecosystem resilience. It allows for the exchange of
genetic diversity, reduces the risk of local extinctions, and enables
species to adapt to changing environmental conditions. Preserving and
restoring ecological corridors and promoting landscape-scale
conservation strategies are essential for fostering eco-connectivity and
ensuring the long-term survival of species and ecosystems in the face of
ongoing environmental challenges.

*Reference readings*

-   [Papp, C. R., Dostál, I., Hlaváč, V., Berchi, G. M., & Romportl, D.
    (2022).](/files/State_of_the_ArtReport.pdf) Rapid linear transport infrastructure development in the
    Carpathians: A major threat to the integrity of ecological
    connectivity for large carnivores. *Nature Conservation*, *47*,
    35-63.

-   [Carlier, J., & Moran, J. (2019).](/files/Carlier_2019.pdf) Landscape typology and ecological
    connectivity assessment to inform Greenway design. *Science of the
    Total Environment*, *651*, 3241-3252.

-   [Loro, M., Ortega, E., Arce, R. M., & Geneletti, D. (2015).](/files/1-s2.0-S0169204615000602-main.pdf)
    Ecological connectivity analysis to reduce the barrier effect of
    roads. An innovative graph-theory approach to define wildlife
    corridors with multiple paths and without bottlenecks. *Landscape
    and urban planning*, *139*, 149-162.

<h2 id="bison-outputs">BISON outputs</h2>

