---
layout: layouts/page-toc.njk
block_name: "block_innovations"
description: "This module has been elaborated building up on BIZON project outputs, especially deliverable Seiler, A. et all (2022) Report on emerging trends and future challenges, Horizon 2020 project no. 101006661, BISON Biodiversity and Infrastructure Synergies and Opportunities for European Transport Network and resources as listed below."
---

<h2 id="introduction">Introduction</h2>

<div class="slide-border">
    <h4>Introduction -- main messages</h4>

-   **Technical, technological, organizational, and social innovations
    in transport needs to be understood as the means to safeguard
    accessibility and quality of life in sustainable way addressing:**

    -   Innovations of transport technologies (information and
        communication technologies and automation, electrification,
        drons, etc.)

    -   Innovations in transport organization and behavior of transport
        actors (care sharing, ride-healing, modal split, control and
        monitoring systems, etc.),

    -   Transport infrastructure development (roads, railways, maglevs,
        hyperloops lines,)

-   **Nature-based and nature-close solutions can offer in many cases
    sustainable alternatives to technical solutions and challenges for
    safeguarding biodiversity,**

-   **Current and expected transport-oriented innovations are going
    beyond transport itself (monitoring, warning, and protection
    systems)**

-   **Short- and long-term economic effects of innovations should be
    reflected by specific financial modes used in transport
    development,**
</div>

To deal with the harmonization of two important public interests -- to
improve affordable accessibility of services, work, leisure time and
other activities for all citizens avia development of transport systems
services and to safeguard sustainability and development of biodiversity
facing the clime change challenges means to take into account all
current problems, challenges and potentials, but in the same time to
think prospectively, reflexing emerging technological innovations in
transport and challenges for biodiversity. Technological developments in
the synergy with organizational, social and behavioral innovations have
the potential to radically transform the transport sector as we know it
into a more energy efficient and safe, resilient and ecologically and
socially sustainable system in which mobility is replaced by
accessibility and (unnecessary) transport demand is reduced.

Climate change mitigation is now unquestioned and decarbonization and
transformation of the transport sector is central to the concept of
sustainable development reflecting the needs to lower the inevitable and
existing impacts on people and ecosystems. This transformation of the
whole transport sector can provide certain opportunities to improve
conditions for safeguarding the biodiversity, but it requires a holistic
and inclusive approach to benefit from the combination of different
kinds of innovation.

Important part of innovative approaches are nature-based or nature-close
solutions providing a sustainable and economically viable alternative to
conventional technical approaches for the environmental (and ecological)
adaptation of infrastructure. They may not only assist in coping with
climate change but also help to integrate infrastructure in the natural
environment and reduce its negative impacts. Still, the concepts more
broadly using ecosystem services and other nature-close solutions are
rather new and more development and experience is needed to obtain its
full potential.

Triggered by climate change, habitat exploitation and expanding
transport, but also thanks to nature-based solutions and
restauration/conservation achievements, infrastructure managers will
increasingly have to deal with alien and native wildlife species some of
which may be of concern to infrastructure facilities or to biodiversity.
To control the biological threat and simultaneously provide for desired
species, cross-sector strategies for the monitoring and management of
biodiversity need to be developed and adopted.

Traditional impact assessment is not sufficient to address the large
scale and long term effects that accumulate from the various direct and
indirect effects of infrastructure development, climate change and their
repercussion on human societies. Evaluating the cumulative effects on
nature and people alike requires a holistic approach but also a
comprehensive monitoring system that also tracks the outcome of
mitigation attempts.

Social and ecological values should be considered jointly in a holistic
planning and design of transport infrastructure. To develop appropriate
solutions and help people to adopt challenges and accept necessary
changes in e.g., mobility behavior, we need to rely on behavioral and
psychological knowledge rather than technical solutions. Mainstreaming
biodiversity and social concerns in the transport sector must call on
emotional, cultural and recreational values.

Most of the innovations, however, is only implementable if it is
economically defendable Priorities should hence be given to increased
alternative funding, redirected incentives, and new regulation and
transformation metrics. Internalization of externalities of transport
costs can be a key element in this approach. In addition, also
demographic trends in populations affect national and global economy and
must be considered when mainstreaming biodiversity in the transport
sector.

Dealing with the interrelations between innovations in transport
development and biodiversity three main problem areas needs to be
addressed as follows:

-   Innovations of transport technologies (information and communication
    technologies and automation, electrification, drons, etc.)

-   Innovations in transport organization (care sharing, ride-healing,
    modal split, control and monitoring systems),

-   Transport infrastructure development (roads, railways, maglevs,
    hyperloops lines,)

-   Implications for biodiversity mainstreaming

<h2 id="development-innovation">Development and innovations in transport technologies</h2>

<h3 id="transport-means">Innovations of transport means</h3>

<div class="slide-border">
    <h4>Innovations of transport means -- main messages</h4>

- **The main technology developments for future sustainable mobility seems to be concentrated in 3 main domains:**
    - **Innovations based on the use of information and communication technologies, robotization and automation,**
    - **Vehicular and infrastructure technology,**
    - **Energy sources and propulsion technologies.**
</div>

<div class="slide-border">
    <h4>Six levels of automation in vehicular technology</h4>

    <figure>
        {% image "innovations/automation.png", "Six levels of automation in vehicular technology" %}
        <figcaption>Redrawn from: (Verwoort et al., 2017). </figcaption>
    </figure>
</div>

The main technology developments for future sustainable mobility seems to be concentrated in 3 main domains (see as well Barcel√≥, 2019): 
- Innovations based on the use of information and communication technologies, robotization and automation,
- Vehicular and infrastructure technology, 
- Energy sources and propulsion technologies.

<h4>Innovations based on the use of information and communication technologies, robotization and automation</h4>

The probably most influential and ground-breaking technological
development that will reshape transportation in the near future is the
implementation of artificial intelligence (AI) in the automation of
vehicles and its capabilities to obtain, analyse and learn from Big Data
(Marr, 2020). AI will govern traffic flows safely and operate individual
vehicles, gather vast amounts of data on environment, infrastructure,
and vehicles, and share data with others even outside the transport
system. AI will further interpret, learn from, and respond to the joined
flow of Big Data. The amazing and truly revolutionary thing is however,
that these functions do not need highly complex coding or a centralized
computation service but can self-develop from machine-learning
algorithms and no-code AI platforms across the Internet of Things (IoT)
(Dilmegani, Cem, 2021). In addition, these functions do not need
expensive new infrastructures but can be integrated into or benefit from
existing transportation networks, provided that efficient and fast
communication is available.

One initial requirement for the automation of vehicles are multiple
sensor networks that inform the vehicles' AI about all driving
parameters such as e.g., speed, distance to next vehicle ahead,
proximity to objects near the vehicle, the presence of road demarcations
or the detection of humans and larger wildlife next to the road
(Verwoort et al., 2017). This also creates immense opportunities for AI
machinebased learning. For example, the car will remember events linked
to GPS positions, learn to foresee risks, and hence pre-emptively
counteract, such as by reducing travel speed at times and locations
where risk factors are most frequently observed. When connected to the
IoT, this experience could be shared with other vehicles, and they could
adopt precautionary behaviors. This data also offers opportunities to
aid biodiversity monitoring for conservation.

Many of these sensors already exist in rail and road transport today and
can be purchased and retrofitted as driver assistance suites in cars.
The information collected by the sensors installed in the cars can be
combined with the information collected by the sensors in surrounding
environment and support safe control of the transport mean. The advanced
technologies allow higher levels of automation up to fully autonomous
vehicles.

Example can be the technologies used by Volvo, Mercedes, Volkswagen,
Tesla, Polestar, providing a level 1-2 automation (Figure 1-1). While
levels 3-4 automation are already in the making by some automobile
makers and IT-companies and can be expected to have its break-through in
the very near future, it will require a broader political and
technological consensus on the regulatory frameworks and an extensive,
connected, and intelligent transport system to provide for a level 5
fully autonomous vehicle fleet .

Connected and autonomous driving (C&AD) will eventually free the driver
from any responsibility allowing the use of transportation time for
other tasks than monitoring vehicle and traffic. The question is not
whether at all but how quickly this innovations will approach (to what
degree L0-L2 vehicles will be entirely replaced by L4 or L5 systems
during the next 20-30 years. How swiftly this transgression can be made
depends on multiple sociological, psychological and economic factors,
but the faster the change the greater the benefits for the economy --
and for the environment (Sperling, 2018). Given the immense number of
vehicles and the huge number of 'individual' experiences that could be
shared, the benefits of "fleet learning" may appear almost
instantaneously and without any central design or plan. It only requires
that car manufactures are willing or obliged to share data across a
common platform (Sperling, 2018). In such a cooperative intelligent
transport system (C-ITS), automated vehicles communicate with other
vehicles in the surrounding network to avoid collisions and congestion,
with road information systems such as traffic lights or speed
regulations, and with the internet at large supporting e.g., delivery
schemes, personal time schedules and intermodal connections.

<figure>
    {% image "innovations/automation.png", "Six levels of automation in vehicular technology" %}
    <figcaption>Figure 1-1: Six levels of automation in vehicular technology defined by the Society of Automotive Engineers in 2014. Redrawn from: (Verwoort et al., 2017).</figcaption>
</figure>

Combined with information provided by and distributed across social
networks, these highly decentralised and complex communication networks
have the potential to greatly increase traffic safety, enhance efficacy,
and reduce energy consumption (Linse et al., 2015). Member States and
the EU work together on a common vision of connected and automated
mobility and swiftly develop and deploy the necessary regulatory
frameworks .

What applies to cars and road transportation, also applies of course to
trains, airplanes, and ships. On railways, connected and intelligent
trains are more closely tracked by the centralised traffic control
centres, allowing for overall increase in transportation by performing
infrastructure and operational analysis that will occur with the
increase in traffic density (IEA, 2019). Since December 2021, four
autonomous trains created by Siemens and Deutsche Bahn are in service in
the city of Hamburg, Germany, as part of a ‚Ç¨60 million modernisation
project for its S-Bahn urban rail system11. In France, the first fully
autonomous SNCF trains are expected in traffic in 202312, while in
cities like Paris, Barcelona and Copenhagen driverless subways (Metro)
are already in use for years. Airplanes are already in autopilot mode
during most of their operations and automation will increase (SKYbrary
Aviation Safety, 2021), while fully automated and connected shipping is
under development (Cassauwers, 2020; Siemens, Schnitiger Corp., 2021).
This trend may not only change our way of life but entail significant
benefits to biodiversity.

<h4>Vehicular and infrastructure technology</h4>

Obviously, we are aiming for cleaner vehicles that use upgraded or new
infrastructures in more efficient, inter-connected and intelligent ways.
While air transport, especially by unmanned aircraft systems (i.e.,
drones) will develop further into an integrated part of the sectors
(Gupta et al., 2021), surface transportation will remain the dominant
way to transport people and goods.

New type of transport infrastructure (e.g., Hyperloops) may allow for
super-speed travel, but still, most of tomorrows infrastructure may not
be fundamentally different from what we operate today. In other words,
even in the longer run, there will most likely be roads, railways,
canals, airports, and harbours, populated by cars, trains, airplanes and
ships.

