---
title: "Thematic block 1: SEA/EIA (Strategic Environmental Assessment /
Environmental Impact Assessment)"
description: "Here should be description for generating content page"
layout: layouts/page-toc.njk
---

<h2 id="general-part">General part</h2>

According to the European Commission [1](http://ec.europa.eu/environment/eia/index_en.htm), 
environmental assessment is a
procedure that ensures that the environmental implications of decisions
are taken into account before the decisions are made. Environmental
assessment can be undertaken for individual projects, such as a dam,
motorway, airport or factory, on the basis of Directive 2011/92/EU
(known as "Environmental Impact Assessment" -- EIA Directive), or for
public plans or programmes on the basis of Directive 2001/42/EC (known
as "Strategic Environmental Assessment" -- SEA Directive). A common
principle of both Directives is to ensure that plans, programmes and
projects likely to have significant effects on the environment are made
subject to an environmental assessment, prior to their approval.
Consultation with the public is a key feature of environmental
assessment procedures.

The Directives on Environmental Assessment aim to provide a high level
of protection of the envi­ronment and contribute to the integration of
environmental considerations into the preparation of projects, plans and
programs with a view to reduce their environmental impact. They ensure
public participation in decision-making and thereby strengthen the
quality of decisions. Hence, the Direc­tives on Environmental Assessment
are crucial tools for sustainable development.

Impact assessment was the main process adopted worldwide (originated in
1969, The National En­vironmental Policy Act, USA). Strategic
Environmental Assessment (SEA) subsequently emerged as a response to the
need to identify potential negative environmental impacts early in the
planning process. It is considered that the SEA offers more guarantees
for sustainable development due to its pro-active strategic character
(it has the ability to shape strategies, plans and programs) compared to
the EIA that is traditionally reactive (analyses a previously defined
project) (Partidario, 1996).

SEA has the capacity to better identify the potential of the cumulative
impact and to avoid it by in­tervening in the types of projects that are
promoted by strategies and plans. Therefore, it is important to note
that while the main question that guides the EIA process is "how it is
intended to be done", in the SEA process, the questions are: why?, what?
where?

<h2 id="sea-process">SEA Process</h2>

The Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) process is governed in the
European Union by Direc­tive 2001/42/EC on the assessment of the effects
of certain plans and programmes on the environ­ment (SEA Directive). The
SEA Directive should have been transposed in the national legislation of
the Member States by July 2004 (Nistorescu et al, 2019).

According to the Directive, its goal "is to provide for a high level of
protection of the environment and contribute to the integration of
environmental considerations into the preparation and adoption of plans
and programs with a view to promoting sustainable development, by
ensuring that, in accor­dance with this Directive, an environmental
assessment is carried out of certain plans and programs which are likely
to have significant effects on the environment".

SEA originated after the environmental impact assessment (EIA), with
inputs from biophysical plan­ning and policy analysis. The overall
purpose of SEA was to ensure that environmental issues would be
adequately considered at early stages of development policy-making and
planning (broadly con­sidered). SEA relates to highly complex issues, at
multiple spatial and temporal scales, engaging a variety of stakeholders
and consequently, multiple perspectives and expectations (Partidario,
2012).

SEA, in a strategic thinking approach, has three very specific
objectives (Partidario, 2012):

1.  Encourage environmental and sustainability integration (including
    biophysical, social, institutional and economic aspects), setting
    enabling conditions to nest future development proposals;

2.  Add-value to decision-making, discussing opportunities and risks of
    development options and turning problems into opportunities;

3.  Change minds and create a strategic culture in decision-making,
    promoting institutional cooper­ation and dialogues, avoiding
    conflicts.

Through these objectives, SEA can contribute to (Partidario, 2012):

-   Ensure a strategic, systemic and broad perspective in relation to
    environmental issues within a sustainability framework;

-   Contribute to identifying, selecting and discussing major
    development options towards more sustainable decisions (intertwining
    biophysical, social, institutional and economic issues);

-   Detect strategic opportunities and risks in the options under
    analysis and facilitate the consider­ation of cumulative processes;

-   Suggest follow-up programmes, through strategic management and
    monitoring;

-   Ensure participative and transparent processes that engage all
    relevant stakeholders through dialogues, and foster more integrated
    decisions in relation to the array of relevant points of view.

Due to its systematic and participatory approach, SEA is particularly
relevant in the context of connec­tivity projects for protected areas,
and in for the integration of protected areas into wider landscapes and
seascapes.

The SEA Directive applies to a wide range of **public plans and
programs** (e.g. on land use, transport, energy, waste, agriculture,
etc.). The SEA Directive does not refer to policies. Plans and
programmes in the sense of the SEA Directive must be **prepared or
adopted by an authority** (at national, regional or local level) and be
**required by legislative, regulatory or administrative provisions**.

An SEA is **mandatory** for plans/programmes which:

-   are prepared for agriculture, forestry, fisheries, energy, industry,
    transport, waste/water manage­ment, telecommunications, tourism, town
    & country planning or land use and which set the framework for
    future development consent of projects listed in the EIA Directive;

Or

-   have been determined to require an assessment under the Habitats
    Directive.

<h2 id="eia-process">EIA Process</h2>

The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process is governed in the
European Union by Directive 2011/92/EU on the assessment of the effects
of certain public and private projects on the environ­ment (EIA
Directive).

The development of the EIA concept took place in the 1960s with the
onset of the environmental movement in the United States (IAIA, 2009;
Felleman, 2010). From a legal point of view, the EIA bases were put in
place in 1969 in the United States through the adoption of the National
Environ­mental Policy Act (NEPA). The first EIA Directive was adopted in
the EU in 1985 (Directive 85/337/ EEC). The EIA Directive of 1985 has
been amended three times, in 1997, in 2003 and in 2009. The initial
Directive and its amendments have been codified by Directive 2011/92/EU.
Directive 2011/92/ EU has been amended in 2014 by Directive 2014/52/EU,
which introduced new elements in the EIA procedure, e.g.: one-stop shop
for assessments deriving from the EIA and Nature Directives, quality
control mechanism, mandatory assessment of reasonable alternatives,
monitoring, broader scope of the EIA covering new issues (climate
change, biodiversity, risks prevention), as well as justification of
screening/EIA decisions.

The goal of the EIA Directive is to ensure a high level of protection of
the environment and human health, through the establishment of minimum
requirements for the environmental impact assess­ment of projects.

The main objective of the 2014 amendments was to simplify the rules for
assessing the potential effects of projects on the environment. The
amending EIA Directive is in line with the drive for smarter regulation,
as it reduces the administrative burden. It also improves the level of
environmental protec­tion, with a view to making business decisions on
public and private investments more sound, more predictable and
sustainable in the longer term. The new approach pays greater attention
to threats and challenges that have emerged since the original rules
came into force some 25 years ago. This means more attention to areas
like resource efficiency, climate change and disaster prevention, which
are now better reflected in the assessment process. The main amendments
are as follows:

-   Member States now have a mandate to **simplify their different
    environmental assessment procedures;**

-   **Timeframes** are introduced for the different stages of
    environmental assessments: screening de­cisions should be taken
    within 90 days (although extensions are possible) and public
    consultations should last at least 30 days. Members States also need
    to ensure that final decisions are taken within a "reasonable period
    of time";

-   The **screening** procedure, determining whether an EIA is required,
    is simplified. Decisions must be duly motivated in the light of the
    updated screening criteria;

-   **EIA reports** are to be made more understandable for the public,
    especially as regards assess­ments of the current state of the
    environment and alternatives to the proposal in question;

-   The **quality and the content of the reports** will be improved.
    Competent authorities will also need to prove their objectivity to
    avoid **conflicts of interest**;

-   The grounds for **development consent decisions** must be clear and
    more transparent for the public. Member States may also set
    timeframes for the validity of any reasoned conclusions or opinions
    issued as part of the EIA procedure;

-   If projects do entail significant adverse effects on the
    environment, developers will be obliged to do the necessary to
    avoid, prevent or reduce such effects. These projects will need to
    be **monitored** using procedures determined by the Member States.
    Existing monitoring arrange­ments may be used to avoid duplication of
    monitoring and unnecessary costs.

The EIA Directive applies to a wide range of public and private
projects, which are defined in Annexes I and II:

-   Mandatory EIA: all projects listed in Annex I are considered as
    having significant effects on the environment and require an EIA
    (e.g. long-distance railway lines, motorways and express roads,
    airports with a basic runway length ≥ 2100 m, installations for the
    disposal of hazardous waste, installations for the disposal of
    non-hazardous waste \> 100 tonnes/day, wastewater treatment plants
    \> 150.000 p.e.);

-   Discretion of Member States (screening): for projects listed in
    Annex II, the national authorities have to decide whether an EIA is
    needed. This is done by the "screening procedure", which determines
    the effects of projects on the basis of thresholds/criteria or a
    case by case examination. However, the national authorities must
    take into account the criteria laid down in Annex III. The projects
    listed in Annex II are in general those not included in Annex I
    (railways, roads waste disposal installations, waste water treatment
    plants), but also other types such as urban development projects,
    flood-relief works, changes of Annex I and II existing projects
    etc.).

According to the European Commission31, the EIA procedure can be
summarized as follows: the de­veloper may request the competent authority
to say what should be covered by the EIA information to be provided by
the developer (scoping stage); the developer must provide information on
the environmental impact (EIA report -- Annex IV); the environmental
authorities and the public (and affected Member States) must be informed
and consulted; the competent authority decides, taken into consideration
the results of consultations. The public is informed of the decision
afterwards and can challenge the decision before the courts.

According to the EIA Directive, the environmental impact assessment
shall identify, describe and as­sess in an appropriate manner, in the
light of each individual case, the direct and indirect significant
effects of a project on the following factors: (a) human beings, fauna
and flora population and human health; (b) biodiversity, with particular
attention to species and habitats protected under Directive 92/43/EEC
and Directive 2009/147/EC; (c) land, soil, water, air and climate and
landscape; (d) material assets, cultural heritage and the landscape; (e)
the interaction between the factors referred to in points (a) to (d).
The effects on the factors set out therein shall include the expected
effects deriving from the vulnerability of the project to risks of major
accidents and/or disasters that are relevant to the project concerned.

Role of SEA/EIA processes in nature conservation

The SEA Directive contains a number of starting principles that provide
a useful basis for considering biodiversity in SEA. 'Biodiversity' is
specified in the list of factors to be assessed, as well as 'fauna' and
'flora'.

As previously presented, during the SEA procedure an environmental
report is prepared in which the likely significant effects on the
environment and the reasonable alternatives of the proposed plan or
program are identified. Annex I(d) of the SEA Directive requires the
environmental report to consider any existing environmental problems
which are relevant to the PP including, in particular, those re­lating to
any areas of a particular environmental importance, such as areas
designated pursuant to Habitats Directive) and Birds Directive. Annex
I(f) requires the environmental report to consider the effects on
'biodiversity', 'fauna' and 'flora'.

The recitals to the Directive acknowledge that "the Convention on
Biological Diversity requires Parties to integrate as far as possible
and as appropriate the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity into relevant sectoral or cross-sectoral plans and
programmes".

Annex I of the SEA Directive requires the environmental report to
consider environmental objectives at international, EU and Member State
levels.

The EIA Directive also contains a number of principles that provide the
basis for considering biodi­versity in EIA. The revised EIA Directive
refers now explicitly to 'biodiversity', unlike its previous version.

The recitals to the Directive clearly link the EIA process with the
Convention on Biological Diversity and the EU 2020 Biodiversity
Strategy: "The United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity ('the
Convention'), to which the Union is party pursuant to Council Decision
93/626/EEC(9), requires assess­ment, as far as possible and as
appropriate, of the significant adverse effects of projects on
biological diversity, which is defined in Article 2 of the Convention,
with a view to avoiding or minimising such effects. Such prior
assessment of those effects should contribute to attaining the Union
headline target adopted by the European Council in its conclusions of
25-26 March 2010 of halting biodiversity loss and the degradation of
ecosystem services by 2020 and restoring them where feasible".

The revised EIA Directive includes the following references to
biodiversity:

-   Article 3: The environmental impact assessment shall identify,
    describe and assess in an appro­priate manner, in the light of each
    individual case, the direct and indirect significant effects of a
    project on the following factors: \[...\] (b) **biodiversity**, with
    particular attention to species and habitats protected under
    Directive 92/43/EEC and Directive 2009/147/EC \[...\];

-   Annex II A -- Information to be provided by the Developer on the
    projects listed in Annex II: 3. A description of any likely
    significant effects, to the extent of the information available on
    such effects, of the project on the environment resulting from: (a)
    the expected residues and emissions and the production of waste,
    where relevant; (b) the use of natural resources, in particular
    soil, land, water and **biodiversity**;

-   Annex III -- Criteria to determine whether the projects listed in
    Annex II should be subject to an Environmental Impact Assessment:

-   Characteristics of projects: The characteristics of projects must be
    considered, with particular regards to: \[...\] (c) the use of
    natural resources, in particular land, soil, water and
    **biodiversity** \[...\];

-   Location of projects: The environmental sensitivity of geographical
    areas likely to be affected by projects must be considered, with
    particular regards to: \[...\] (b) the relative abundance,
    availability, quality and regenerative capacity of natural resources
    (including soil, land, water and **biodiversi­ty**) in the area and
    its underground; (c) the absorption capacity of the natural
    environment, pay­ing particular attention to the following areas: (i)
    wetlands, riparian areas, river mouths; (ii) coastal zones and the
    marine environment; (iii) mountain and forest areas; (iv) nature
    reserves and parks; (v) areas classified or protected under national
    legislation; Natura 2000 areas designated by Mem­ber States pursuant
    to Directive 92/43/EEC and Directive 2009/147/EC \[...\];

-   Annex IV -- Information for the Environmental Impact Assessment
    report:

-   Description of the project, including in particular: \[...\] (c) a
    description of the main characteristics of the operational phase of
    the project (in particular any production process), for instance,
    energy demand and energy used, nature and quantity of the materials
    and natural resources (including water, land, soil and
    **biodiversity**) used;

-   A description of the factors specified in Article 3(1) likely to be
    significantly affected by the project: population, human health,
    **biodiversity** (for example fauna and flora), land (for example
    land take), soil (for example organic matter, erosion, compaction,
    sealing), water (for example hydro-morpho­logical changes, quantity
    and quality), \[...\];

-   A description of the likely significant effects of the project on
    the environment resulting from, inter alia: \[...\](b) the use of
    natural resources, in particular land, soil, water and
    **biodiversity**, considering as far as possible the sustainable
    availability of these resources \[...\].

Biodiversity is the subjects of a many pieces of EU legislation,
policies and strategies, including bind­ing targets for Member States.

The Natura 2000 network of protected areas, created on the basis of the
Habitats and the Birds Directives, is the backbone of the EU's
biodiversity policy. However, it is important to remember that the
concept of biodiversity is not limited to the Natura 2000 network; it is
much broader (European Commission, 2013, Guidance on Integrating Climate
Change and Biodiversity into Strategic Environ­mental Assessment and
Guidance on Integrating Climate Change and Biodiversity into
Environmen­tal Impact Assessment):

-   The Birds and Habitats Directives also cover species and habitats
    outside Natura 2000 sites;

-   Under Article 6(3) of the Habitats Directive, an 'appropriate
    assessment' is required for any plan or project likely to have a
    significant effect on Natura 2000 site, even if it is implemented
    outside these sites;

-   Article 10 of the Habitats Directive recognises the importance of
    ensuring the ecological coher­ence of the Natura 2000 sites;

-   Finally, the **EU 2020 Biodiversity Strategy** as endorsed by the
    Council and European Parliament covers the whole territory and
    emphasises the benefits that ecosystems give us. It provides a
    package of actions needed to halt the loss of biodiversity and the
    degradation of ecosystem services by 2020 and to restore them so far
    as feasible.

Therefore, the SEAs and EIAs should look at all these aspects of
biodiversity and the quality of sur­roundings. Biodiversity has been a
core part of EU policy for over 20 years. Nevertheless, the overall
trends are still negative and recent policy has been considered
ineffective. This is shown by the EU's failure to achieve the target of
halting biodiversity loss by 2010. In 2011, the European Commission
adopted a new EU 2020 Biodiversity Strategy with its 2020 headline
target --- 'Halting the loss of biodiversity and the degradation of
ecosystem services in the EU by 2020, and restoring them so far as
feasible, while stepping up the EU contribution to averting global
biodiversity loss.' Target 2 of this Strategy (restoring at least 15% of
degraded ecosystems) is broken down into accompanying actions, two of
which seek to influence planning practices: set priorities to restore
and promote the use of green infrastructure (Action 6) and ensure 'no-
net-loss' of biodiversity and ecosystem services (Action 7). These
provide a good policy basis for preserving ecosystem services and the
use of eco­system-based approaches and green infrastructure in SEAs to
support PPs and in EIAs to support projects (European Commission, 2013).

It is very important to identify the key issues from the biodiversity
perspective early in the SEA and EIA processes, when many options are
still open, to ensure that they are assessed effectively throughout the
process. It is necessary to consider not only the impacts of the plan,
program or project on biodi­versity but also the impact of the natural
environment on the plan, program or project.

<h2 id="role-of-processes">Role of SEA/EIA processes in maintaining ecological connectivity</h2>

SEA & EIA represents the two major pillars for the development of
sustainable plans and projects. Both for SEA & EIA processes, one of the
main concerns is to address habitat fragmentation focusing on
maintaining the level of interconnectivity among ecosystems which allow
them to sustain the natural processes.

Both SEA & EIA Directives do not address directly the GI and ecological
connectivity but contains most of the requirements needed to do so. For
example, in the EIA Directive the GI or the ecological corridors are not
mentioned in the Annex III (selection criteria to determine if projects
listed in Annex II should be subject to an environmental impact
assessment) but the existing criteria, particularly the ones related to
the "location of projects" (e.g. "the relative abundance, availability,
quality and regen­erative capacity of natural resources" or "the
absorption capacity of the natural environment") allows for the
consideration of site sensitivity and natural processes in the
assessments of plans and projects.

Both procedures involve public participation and therefore they are
extremely useful in debating the options regarding the socio-economic
developments. SEA & EIA have also a technical component which
constitutes a powerful instrument for adapting the proposed plans &
projects. SEA process plays a crucial role in selecting the
alternatives, particularly when the process is conducted at broader
scales (national or regional). By doing so, SEA can contribute
significantly to avoiding the significant impacts on green
infrastructure and particularly on ecological connectivity by supporting
alternatives which avoid sensitive areas or have the capacity to
maintain a good level of permeability.

EIA, as a project-oriented process has also a good capacity to avoid
significant impacts and also to contribute to the reduction of impacts
when avoidance cannot be achieved at a satisfactory level. The best
example is in the case of road infrastructure: large structures like
bridges, viaducts or tunnels represent an ideal option to maintain
ecological connectivity but when such constructions cannot be
implemented, measures to reduce the impact of connectivity fragmentation
have to be implement­ed (eco-ducts, green bridges or underpasses).

The key principles of using SEA & EIA to warrant ecological connectivity
are:

1.  Apply Ecosystem Based Management: a correct assessment of impacts
    should rely on the identi­fication of ecosystems and their key
    processes. The intent is to maintain those spatial and tempo­ral
    characteristics of ecosystems such that component species and
    ecological processes can be sustained and human well-being supported
    and improved;

2.  No-net-loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services. The principle
    requires that damages resulting from human activities must be
    balanced by at least equivalent gains;

3.  Assure interpenetration of grey and green infrastructure:
    development of grey infrastructure should not interrupt the
    connectivity of GI;

4.  Apply hierarchy of interventions: avoidance is preferable to
    mitigation and compensation is the last option. Avoidance of
    significant impacts cannot be achieved without taking in
    consideration all feasible alternatives of a plan/project;

5.  Apply adaptive management. As a formal response to the presence of
    uncertainty and risk, adaptive management is a systematic learning
    process that formally plans and monitors the out­comes of decisions
    to improve our ability to better manage natural resources given
    uncertainty.

The main methodological steps to assure the implementation of the
above-mentioned principles for road infrastructure plans/projects are:

1.  Identification of ecosystems and their key processes (which might be
    affected by the implemen­tation of proposed plan/project) based on an
    up-to-date and comprehensive database. Identifi­cation of critical
    connectivity areas should be an important task along the
    identification of other highly sensitive components like wilderness
    areas or critical habitats;

2.  Identification of existing dysfunctionalities (existing pressures)
    in terms of GI carrying capacity and connectivity;

3.  Analysis of a large spectrum of alternatives (including different
    locations and different construc­tive options);

4.  Assessment of potential impacts for all feasible alternatives which
    has the potential to sustain and develop the GI (mainly the
    ecological connectivity);

5.  Selection of the alternative(s) with the highest degree of avoidance
    for significant impacts;

6.  Prediction of the impacts and quantification of all forms of
    impacts, particularly the ones leading to habitat loss and habitat
    fragmentation;

7.  Defining all the mitigation measures required in order to reduce
    significant impacts on GI taking also, in consideration "historical"
    and cumulative impacts;

8.  Implementation of compensatory measures if this is the only way to
    reduce the significant im­pacts on Natura 2000 sites. All mitigation
    or compensatory measures proposing the restoration, rehabilitation
    or creation of natural areas should primarily be focused on
    regaining/maintaining the ecological connectivity;

9.  Implementation of a monitoring program during construction and
    operation in order to assess the efficiency of mitigation measures,
    to quantify the residual impacts and to propose and imple­ment
    possible corrective measures.

<h2 id="references">References</h2>

-   **European Commission, 2013**, Guidance on Integrating Climate
    Change and Biodiversity into Environ­mental Impact Assessment, Study
    Contract No 07.0307/2010/580136/ETU/A3, implemented for the Eu­ropean
    Commission by Milieu Ltd, Collingwood Environmental Planning Ltd and
    Integra Consulting Ltd;

-   **Felleman, J., Herz, J., Draggan, S., 2010**, „Environmental Impact
    Assessment\". In: Encyclopedia of Earth. Eds. Cutler J. Cleveland
    (Washington, D.C.: Environmental Information Coalition, National
    Council for Sci­ence and the Environment).
    http://www.eoearth.org/article /Environmental \_Impact_Assessment;

-   **IAIA, 2009**, What Is Impact Assessment?,
    \<http://www.iaia.org/publicdocuments/special-publications/
    What%20is%20IA_web.pdf\>;

-   **Nistorescu** M,, **Ioniță** A. and **Doba** A. (2019): Keeping
    Nature Connected -- EIA for Integrated Green Infrastructure Planning
    -- Training Package, Propark, Romania.

-   **Partidário, M.R., 2012**, Strategic Environmental Assessment
    Better Practice Guidance - Methodological guidance for strategic
    thinking in SEA, Lisbon, Portuguese Environment Agency and Redes
    Energéticas Nacionais (REN), SA;

<h2 id="training-package">EIA/SEA Training Package</h2>

Within TRANSGREEN Project, a comprehensive EIA/SEA Training Package had
been developed to help stakeholders obtain theoretical and mostly
practical knowledge about these two processes.

The course aims at presenting some specific aspects that need to be
applied in identifying and assessing the environmental impact generated
by infrastructure projects so as to ensure that the best measures to
avoid, reduce and mitigate impacts are taken into account in the design,
construction and operation of these projects.

Target group includes representatives of the national road and rail
infrastructure companies, representatives of the Ministry of Transport,
environmental consultants involved in the elaboration of environmental
impact assessment studies and appropriate assessment studies for
transport infrastructure projects, NGOs with activity in environmental
protection and transport infrastructure.

Duration of the course is 16 hours that are to be spread across two
consecutive days.

Main objective of the course it that participants understand and adopt
good working practices presented in the field of environmental impact
assessment and management of green infrastructure so as to ensure the
quality of impact assessments and their contribution to the improvement
of transport infrastructure projects.

The course approaches these topics:

-   What are Green Infrastructure and ecological connectivity?

-   Means to preserve, enhance and restore ecological connectivity;

-   Legal framework for SEA/EIA/AA and why is SEA & EIA essential for
    maintaining ecological connectivity?

-   Grey infrastructure permeability assessment;

-   What is a significant impact and how to avoid and reduce significant
    impacts on habitat fragmentation;

-   Quality review of Environmental Reports (SEA/EIA/AA);

-   Best practices in data collection for ecological connectivity and in
    the identification of maintaining, enhancing and restore ecological
    connectivity.

Three practical exercises are prepared for course participants to
sharpen their understanding:

-   Exercise 1 -- The identification of suitable areas for the placement
    of ecoducts, where multiple barriers for wildlife connectivity are
    present

-   Exercise 2 -- Permeability

-   Exercise 3 -- Measures

The full course including all the training materials can be accessed
here: [http://transgreen.patko.sk/?page_id=654](http://transgreen.patko.sk/?page_id=654)
